Neoarchaean tectonic history of the Witwatersrand Basin and Ventersdorp Supergroup: New constraints from high-resolution 3D seismic reflection data
Musa S.D. Manzi a,⁎, Kim A.A. Hein a,1, Nick King b,2, Raymond J. Durrheim a,c
a School of Geosciences, University of the Witwatersrand Johannesburg, PBag 3, WITS, 2050, Republic of South Africa
b South Deep Gold Mine, Gold Fields Limited, Republic of South Africa
c Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) and University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, Republic of South Africa
 article info
Article history:
Received 6 November 2012
Received in revised form 11 January 2013 Accepted 18 January 2013
Available online 28 January 2013
Keywords:
Neoarchaean Witwatersrand Basin Ventersdorp Supergroup Seismics
Structure
Tectonics
1. Introduction
The West Wits Line and West Rand goldfields of the Mesoarchaean Witwatersrand Basin (Fig. 1) have been the focus of renewed interest in recent years in terms of their strato-structural and geophysical archi- tecture (Beach and Smith, 2007; Dankert and Hein, 2010; Frimmel and Minter, 2002; Mambane et al., 2011; Manzi et al., 2012a; Mashabella, 2011; Mohale, 2010). The studies undertaken by Coward et al. (1995), Beach and Smith (2007), Dankert and Hein (2010), Jolley et al. (2007) and others confirm that the basin experienced more than one episode of deformation although Dankert and Hein (2010) pointed out that
⁎ Corresponding author. Tel.: +27 11 717 6623.
E-mail addresses: Musa.Manzi@students.wits.ac.za (M.S.D. Manzi),
kim.ncube-hein@wits.ac.za (K.A.A. Hein), nick.king@goldfields.co.za (N. King), raymond.durrheim@wits.ac.za (R.J. Durrheim).
1 Tel.: +27 11 717 6623.
2 Tel.: +27 83 657 9518.
0040-1951/$ – see front matter © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tecto.2013.01.014
abstract
First-order scale structures in the West Wits Line and West Rand goldfields of the Witwatersrand Basin (South Africa) were mapped using the high-resolution 3D reflection seismic method. Structural models constrain the magnitude of displacement of thrusts and faults, the gross structural architecture and Neoarchaean tectonic evo- lution of the West Rand and Bank fault zones, which offset the gold-bearing reefs of the basin.
The merging of several 3D seismic surveys made clear the gross strato-structural architecture of the gold- fields; a macroscopic fold-thrust belt is crosscut by a macroscopic extensional fault array. These are dissected, eroded and overlain by the Transvaal Supergroup above an angular unconformity.
The seismic sections confirm that the West Rand Group (ca. 2985–2902 Ma) is unconformably overlain by the Central Rand Group (ca. 2902–2849 Ma), with tilting of the West Rand Group syn- to post-erosion at ca. 2.9 Ga. The seismic sections also confirm that an unconformable relationship exists between the Central Rand Group and the auriferous Ventersdorp Contact Reef (VCR), with an easterly-verging fold-thrust belt being initiated concomitant to deposition of the VCR at approximately 2.72 Ga. Fold-thrust formation includ- ed development of the (1) newly identified first-order scale Libanon Anticline, (2) Tandeka and Jabulani thrusts which displace the West Rand Group, and (3) parasite folds.
The fold-thrust belt is crosscut by a macroscopic extensional fault array (or rift-like system of faults) which incepted towards the end of extrusion of the Ventersdorp lavas, and certainly during deposition of the Platberg Group (2709–2643 Ma) when a mantle plume may have heated the lithosphere. The West Rand and Bank fault zones formed at this time and include (1) the West Rand and Bank faults which are scissors faults; (2) second and third-order scale normal faults in the immediate footwall and hanging wall of the faults; (3) drag synclines, and (4) rollover anticlines.
   © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
surprisingly little regional-scale kinematic and structural analysis has taken place across the Witwatersrand Basin despite more than 100 years of mining of gold. However, it is generally agreed that the Witwatersrand Basin underwent inversion tectonics during and after deposition of the quartzite and conglomerate units (some auriferous) of the Central Rand Group, from extension to compression i.e. positive inversion (c.f., Beach and Smith, 2007; Dankert and Hein, 2010), and then compression to extension (i.e. negative inversion) during deposi- tion of the Ventersdorp Supergroup (Van der Westhuizen et al., 1991).
Listric faults in the Witwatersrand Basin were recognized by Coward et al. (1995) and Vermaakt and Chunnet (1994) through studies in gold mines in the West Wits Line and West Rand goldfields, and by Beach and Smith (2007), Gibson et al. (2000, 2004) and Gibson (2005) through the interpretation of 3D seismic reflection data. Beach and Smith (2007) showed that the dominant structural styles, including major normal fault zones and their related drag folds, are those attributed to extensional tectonics that occurred dur- ing deposition of the Ventersdorp Supergroup (ca. 2709–2643 Ma) possibly during deposition of the Platberg Group.
   
M.S.D. Manzi et al. / Tectonophysics 590 (2013) 94–105 95
 Fig. 1. Location map of the West Rand and West Wits Line (Carletonville) goldfields of the Witwatersrand Basin in South Africa, showing historical 3D seismic reflection surveys (modified after Dankert and Hein, 2010; historical surveys after Gibson et al., 2000). Generalized seismic stratigraphy and tectonic events, with dates and ages are derived from Armstrong et al. (1991), Dankert and Hein (2010), Kositcin and Krapež (2004) and Myers et al. (1989). Note that Driefontein and Kloof gold mines have been re-named KDC WEST and KDC EAST, respectively. KDC: Kloof-Driefontein Complex; WUDLs: Western Ultra Deep levels; VCR: Ventersdorp Contact Reef; BLR: Black Reef Formation. aUnpublished; bMartin et al. (1998; zircon U–Pb SHRIMP); c,eArmstrong et al. (1991; single zircon U–Pb SHRIMP); dKositcin and Krapež (2004; zircon U–Pb SHRIMP).

96 M.S.D. Manzi et al. / Tectonophysics 590 (2013) 94–105
Further to this, previous structural models of the Witwatersrand Basin were constrained by low resolution 3D seismic surveys that covered the region to the west of the Bank Fault (Beach and Smith, 2007; Gibson et al., 2000; Jolley et al., 2007). Little or no coverage of the eastern side of the fault (West Rand goldfields) was incorporated.
In this study, the interpretation of high-resolution 3D seismic reflec- tion data that covers the West Wits Line and West Rand goldfields is presented, and includes studies across the Driefontein Block (now termed KDC West), the Kloof Block (now termed the KDC East), and the South Deeps Block (Fig. 1). The structural studies of the entire reprocessed and merged dataset are unique and are herein reported for the first time. The data was used to study the structural setting, mainly the first-order scale structures, but also their associated second- and third-order faults and folds. Focus was given to (1) fault ge- ometry, fault form, and fault-throw analysis, and (2) the relative chro- nology of tectonic events. The results were integrated with borehole data and underground maps to validate the seismic and Neoarchaean tectonic interpretations.
The data has also been used by Manzi et al. (2012a) to map poten- tial conduits of water and methane in the deep gold mines covered by the seismic volume. It has been used in the application of 3D seismic technique in evaluation of ore resources and is reported by Manzi et al. (2012b), and for mapping the distribution and timing of meso- to mega-scale structures and provide constraints on the ore genetic models (Malehmir et al., in press).
2. Geological setting
The Mesoarchaean Witwatersrand Basin, one of the world's premier gold regions and the greatest known source of gold on Earth, was de- posited between ca. 2985 and 2849 Ma (Kositcin and Krapež, 2004) on the Kaapvaal Craton (ca. 3.6–3.2 Ga). The Witwatersrand Super- group overlies the Dominion Group (ca. 3074 ± 6 Ma, Myers et al., 1989; U–Pb detrital zircon SHRIMP), and is made up of coarse clastic rocks and bimodal volcanic rocks. The Witwatersrand Supergroup con- sists of the West Rand and Central Rand groups (Fig. 1).
The West Rand Group unconformably overlies the Dominion Group with clastic and largely marine sedimentary rocks (ca. 2985–2902 Ma; Kositcin and Krapež, 2004; U–Pb detrital zircon SHRIMP). This sequence was deposited in a tectonically stable environment of the volcano- sedimentary succession of the Dominion Group (c.f., Beach and Smith, 2007; Frimmel and Minter, 2002). The West Rand Group is divided into three formations, namely the Discovery, Crown and Jeppestown for- mations. The Crown Formation is a seismically recognizable marker be- cause of a relatively high acoustic impedance contrast between the overlying volcanic rocks and underlying shale units.
Unconformably overlying the West Rand Group are sandstone, conglomerate and shale units of the Central Rand Group (ca. 2902– 2849 Ma; Kositcin and Krapež, 2004; U–Pb detrital zircon SHRIMP), which were deposited in a braided system of rivers of a shallow ma- rine delta. The group hosts the majority of the auriferous reefs that are mined throughout the basin including the Elsberg, Kloof, Libanon and Kimberly reefs of the Johannesburg Subgroup, and Bird, Carbon Leader, North Leader and Middelvlei reefs of the Turffontein Sub- group (De Kock, 1964). The basin-wide Booysens Formation (se- quence of laminated shale units) has been used as a stratigraphic marker to subdivide the Johannesburg Subgroup from the Turffontein Subgroup (McCarthy, 2006; Minter, 1982). Numerous erosional sur- faces are hosted by the Central Rand Group dividing it into fluvial and marine repositories of sedimentation.
Synchronous to, and/or after deposition of the Central Rand Group, the sedimentary rocks of the Witwatersrand Basin were deformed with development of an easterly-verging fold-thrust belt (Beach and Smith, 2007) during the Umzawami Event (Dankert and Hein, 2010) at ca 2.73 Ga. Tectonic transport was from west to east (Beach and Smith, 2007).
The upper part of the Central Rand Group is unconformably overlain by the Ventersdorp Contact Reef (VCR) of the Venterspost Formation, which has the maximum age of 2729 ± 19 Ma (Kositcin and Krapež, 2004; U–Pb detrital zircon SHRIMP). The Venterspost Formation con- sists of a thin fluvial auriferous conglomerate. The VCR represents an erosional surface that formed at the end of deposition of the Central Rand Group (Frimmel et al., 1999; Gartz and Frimmel, 1999; Gibson, 2004, 2005; McCarthy, 2006; Tankard et al., 1982). It unconformably overlies and truncates approximately 2500 m stratigraphic thickness of Witwatersrand Supergroup sediments (Myers et al., 1989; Robb et al., 1991; Spencer, 1992; Winter, 1994). The depth of the VCR unconfor- mity is approximately 3000–4200 m below surface. The conglomerates of the VCR are too thin (less than 1.5 m) to be directly resolved seismi- cally because they fall below the tuning thickness or resolution limit, which is given by 1⁄4 seismic dominant wavelength (λ), where λ = v/f (Widess, 1973). Our data is characterized by the frequency (f) of 65 Hz and a mean velocity (v) of 6500 m/s, thus providing the tuning thickness of 25 m. This implies that the top and bottom of any reef with a thickness less than 25 m may not be resolved. However, the VCR unconformity coincides with a reflective interface or strong seismic reflector resulting from a major acoustic impedance contrast between metamorphosed basalts of the Klipriviersberg Group (~ 6400 m/s veloc- ity) and quartzite units at the top of the Central Rand Group (~ 5700 m/s velocity).
Unconformably overlying the VCR is the Neoarchaean Ventersdorp Supergroup (ca. 2.72–2.63 Ga), which comprises ultramafic and mafic metavolcanic rocks of the Klipriviersberg Group, and metasedimentary rocks and bimodal metavolcanic rocks of the Platberg Group (Crow and Condie, 1988; Van der Westhuizen et al., 1991). The Klipriviersberg Group is divided into five formations, i.e. the Westonaria, Alberton, Orkney, Jeannette, and Edenville formations. The Alberton Formation is dated at 2714±8 Ma (Armstrong et al. 1991; U–Pb detrital zircon SHRIMP). The emplacement of the Ventersdorp Supergroup may have coincided with global-scale mantle overturning that witnessed massive granite–greenstone belt formation in the Yilgarn and Superior cratons, and concomitant to the impingement of a superplume beneath the Kaapvaal Craton (Eriksson et al., 2007).
Bimodal metavolcanic and clastic metasedimentary rocks of the Platberg Group overlie the Klipriviersberg Group (ca. 2709 ± 8 Ma; c.f., Crow and Condie, 1988; Dankert and Hein, 2010) and Pniel Group (Jolley et al., 2004; Phillips and Law, 2000). The meta-sedimentary and meta-volcanic succession of the Platberg Group is exposed in sever- al boreholes in the West Wits Line (De Kock, 1964). The group attains a maximum thickness of approximately 330 m and consists of boulders, cobbles, and fragments of (mainly) amygdaloidal metavolcanic rocks, with subordinate amounts of quartzite, chert and shale (Engelbrecht et al., 1986).
Unconformably overlying the Ventersdorp Supergroup is the rela- tively thin Black Reef Formation, which has been interpreted as the basal lithostratigraphic unit of the Palaeoproterozoic Transvaal Su- pergroup (ca. 2588 ± 6 Ma; Jolley et al., 2004; Krapež, 1985; Vos, 1975). The formation consists of a lower quartzite unit, with a sporad- ically developed conglomerate at the base, overlain by interbedded, black carbonaceous shale and dolomite beds in the upper portion. The Black Reef Formation (BLF) represents a highly reflective inter- face due to a major laterally extensive acoustic impedance contrast between high-velocity, high density dolomite of the Chuniespoort Group of the Transvaal Supergroup and the underlying low-velocity, less dense Ventersdorp metabasalts.
Above the BLF, the Transvaal Supergroup is divided into the Chuniespoort Group and the Pretoria Group. The Chuniespoort Group consists of carbonate (dolomite), banded iron formation and lacustrine deposits (Eriksson et al., 1995, 2007; Frimmel, 2005). The Pretoria Group (~6-7 km thick), which predominantly consists of intercalated mudstone–sandstone units, andesite and subordinate conglomerate beds, diamictite and carbonate units, non-conformably overlies the

Chuniespoort Group (Eriksson et al., 2007; SACS, 1980); a hiatus of 80 My has been proposed by Eriksson and Reczko (1995) and Eriksson et al. (1995, 2006) between the Chuniespoort and Pretoria groups. The non-conformity represents a reflective interface between the overlying low velocity volcanic rocks of the Pretoria Group and the underlying high velocity dolomites of the Chuniespoort Group.
Prior to deposition of the Transvaal Basin, the meta-sedimentary and meta-volcanic rocks of the Witwatersrand and Ventersdorp super- groups underwent extensional tectonics (c.f., Dankert and Hein, 2010; Gartz and Frimmel, 1999; Roering, 1990). Normal fault activity and ex- tension arguably accompanied emplacement of the Klipriviersberg Group, and culminated in graben formation and deposition of the Platberg Group. The base of the BLF of the Transvaal Supergroup cross- cuts earlier tectono-stratigraphy (Coward et al., 1995; Gibson et al., 2000) and a hiatus of approximately 100 Ma marks the transition from the Ventersdorp Supergroup sequences to the Transvaal Basin se- quences (Dankert and Hein, 2010; Phillips and Law, 2000).
3. Methodology
The seismic dataset and the method of collection and processing are described by Manzi et al. (2012a,b). In summary, in 2003, Gold Fields Ltd conducted a high-resolution 3D seismic reflection survey, targeted at the down-dip portion of the Kloof Gold Mine (in the West Wits Line goldfield), which is located west of the West Rand Fault (Fig. 1). The sur- vey was designed to overlap a 3D seismic survey undertaken at Leeudoorn in 1994; the Leeudoorn dataset was re-processed using the latest processing algorithms, and merged with the 2003 Kloof-South Deep data to produce a single seismic cube. This cube was merged (post-migration) with the Western Ultra Deep Levels survey (WUDLs), and incorporated into one continuous volume (>7040 km3).
Interpretation of the Ventersdorp Contact Reef (VCR) and the Black Reef (BLR) were of particular interest in this study. They form important geophysical markers across the study area and were interpreted to con- strain pre- to post-Central Rand Group age structures. Based on interval velocities, the VCR was picked as a peak because of the decrease in seis- mic velocity from the overlying Ventersdorp metabasalts (approx 6400 m/s) to the underlying Central Rand quartzite units (approx. 5750 m/s).
To map the first-order scale structures, the seismic sections were initially interpreted at wide-line spacing, i.e., every fifth crossline and inline of the seismic volume. Once a wide grid of picks was com- pleted, infill picks were made at close line spacing, facilitating de- tailed structural interpretation. To make sure that subtle faults were not missed during the picking, each seismic line was interpreted.
However, the only faults that could be clearly seen in seismic sections during conventional interpretation were those with throws (displacements) greater than, or equal to a one-quarter dominant wavelength (λ) i.e.,
v 4f
where v is the mean velocity and f is the peak frequency of the wave- length (Yilmaz, 1987). The one-quarter dominant wavelength is the widely accepted seismic resolution limit for detection of faults (Lindesay, 1989; Yilmaz, 1987). The peak frequency obtained during 3D seismic acquisition over the West Wits Line and West Rand areas is 65 Hz, and 6500 m/s is a good mean velocity value observed during processing. These parameters provide 100 m dominant wavelength. By using the equation above, faults with a throw of less than 25 m fell below the seismic resolution limit.
Therefore at the scale of the goldfield (study area) the first-order scale structures refer to faults with a throw of 400 m to 2.5 km. The second-order scale structures refer to faults with a throw of less than 400 m, but greater than conventional one-quarter wavelength,
i.e., 25 m. Third-order scale structures refer to faults with a throw of less than one-quarter of a wavelength; these are not visible on the original migrated seismic sections, however, they can be resolved using horizon-based attribute analysis.
4. West Rand Fault Zone (WRFZ)
The West Rand Fault Zone includes; (1) the West Rand Fault (WRF), which is approximately 1.0 km wide, (2) faults in the immediate foot- wall and hanging wall of the WRF, and (3) the Kloof syncline (drag) which lies parallel to the WRF in the hanging wall (Figs. 2, 3a). The fault damage zone is therefore approximately 4.2 km wide. Approxi- mately 1.25 km below the WRF (in depth), the seismic section resolves a reverse fault that displaces and offsets the West Rand Group. The fault is hereafter named the Tandeka Thrust. The Kloof syncline, in the hang- ing wall to the WRF, is 4 km long and trends north–northwest (Gibson et al., 2000; McCarthy, 2006).
The WRF is north–northeast trending and west-dipping. It is listric in form; 65°–70°W in dip at 1.5 km depth; 40°W in dip at 3.0–3.5 km depth; 5°–10°W dip within shale units at the top of the West Rand Group in which it forms a décollement horizon. The WRF has a maxi- mum normal throw of 1.6–2.0 km and an (apparent) sinistral offset of 600 m (Figs. 2, 3a). Normal fault displacement is associated with mac- roscopic clockwise fault block rotation and failure of the hanging wall (the Kloof Block), with development of secondary and tertiary accom- modation (synthetic faults).
Displacement is unequal along the length of the WRF such that it broadly forms a scissor that is hinged in the south–southwest. In the north–northeast, near Cooke Shaft 7 (Fig. 1), second-order antithetic faults splay-off the WRF into the footwall. The graphical distribution of throw, as shown in Fig. 3b, gradually reaches zero near Kloof Shaft 3 where the Kloof and South Deep blocks are hinged. The graph sug- gests that the West Rand fault system has a predictable throw, but curve roughness occurs where subordinate structures form splays. To- wards the north of the survey area (northeast of Kloof 6) the WRF is not imaged as a single fault but resolves two major north–northeast trending normal fault segments (dipping at ~60° to the west) that bound a 1 km long by 250 m wide VCR block.
The seismic sections show that the WRF crosscuts and offsets (nor- mal) the West Rand Group (ca. 2985–2902 Ma), the Central Rand Group (ca. 2902–2849 Ma) and the Ventersdorp Supergroup (ca. 2714 Ma), thus constraining the relative age of the normal fault dis- placement to post-2714 Ma. Importantly, the WRF fault does not pene- trate the base of the Chuniespoort Group (ca. 2588 Ma) of the Transvaal Basin. Thus the WRF was not active during the formation of the Trans- vaal Basin. Extension on the WRF is thereby restricted to the Neoarchaean, or between 2714 Ma and 2588 Ma.
5. Bank Fault Zone (BFZ)
The Bank Fault Zone (BFZ) is interpreted as the first-order scale structure that forms the boundary between the Kloof Block to the east and the Driefontein-WUDLs Block to the west (or KDC east and west, re- spectively). The BFZ includes; (1) the Bank Fault (BF), which is approx- imately 1.5 km wide, and (2) second-order faults in the hanging wall and footwall damage zones (Figs. 2, 4a). Approximately 1.5 km below the BFZ (in depth), the seismic section resolves a reverse fault that is similar in orientation to the BFZ; the fault is hereafter named the Jabulani Thrust (JT). It dips 5°–10° W.
Similar to the WRF, seismic plans and sections of the BF demonstrate it is north–northeast-trending and west-dipping. It is listric in form; 65°– 75°W in dip at 3.5 km depth; 40°W in dip at 5.0–5.5 km depth; 5°–10°W in dip at 7.5 km depth in shale units of the West Rand Group in which it forms a décollement horizon. The BF has a maximum normal throw of 2.0–2.5 km and an apparent sinistral offset of 800 m (Figs. 2, 4a). Normal fault displacement was associated with macroscopic clockwise fault
M.S.D. Manzi et al. / Tectonophysics 590 (2013) 94–105 97

98 M.S.D. Manzi et al. / Tectonophysics 590 (2013) 94–105
 Fig. 2. Seismic model across the Witwatersrand goldfields. (a) 3D regional seismic model incorporating the BLR, Ventersdorp lavas, VCR and B. Shale. The model shows the geometry of West Rand Fault, Bank Fault and Libanon Anticline. (b) Regional crossline seismic section (line AA′ in Fig. 1) through WUDLs, Driefontein, Kloof and South Deep surveys, showing WRF and BF zones and their adjacent TT and JT, respectively. WRF: West Rand Fault; BF: Bank Fault; TF: Tandeka Thrust; JT: Jabulani Thrust; WRG: West Rand Group; CRG: Central Rand Group; Klip: Klipriviersberg; VCR: Ventersdorp Contact Reef; BLR: Black Reef Formation; B. Shale: Booysens Shale.
block rotation of the hanging wall (the Driefontein-WUDLs Block), with development of a rollover anticline (sensu-stricto).
The BF at 3.0–6.0 km depth separates high amplitude reflectors in the hanging wall to the fault from low frequency seismic events in the footwall to the fault. The origin of the high amplitude reflectors is uncer- tain but may characterize brecciated or mylonitised zones similar to those described by Engelbrecht et al. (1986), Fletcher and Gay (1971), Fletcher and Reimold (1989), and Vermaakt (1995) that associate with the bedding-parallel Master Bedding Fault in the West Wits Line goldfield, or may represent intrusions.
Similar to the WRF, displacement is unequal along the length of the BF; the BF broadly forms a scissor that is hinged in the south–southwest. Second-order antithetic faults also splay off the BF into the footwall to form a macroscopic breccia. The graphical distribution of throw, as shown in Fig. 4b, gradually reaches zero where the Driefontein-WUDLs and Kloof blocks are hinged. The graph suggests that the BF has a pre- dictable throw, but curve roughness occurs where subordinate struc- tures form splays.
In concert with the WRF, the BF crosscuts and offsets the West Rand Group, Central Rand Group and Ventersdorp Supergroup, but does not breach the base of the Transvaal Basin; normal displacement on the BF predates deposition in the Transvaal Basin. However, the evidence that the Ventersdorp Supergroup forms a wedge and possible rollover against the BF constrains the relative age of the normal faulting on the BF to between 2714 Ma and 2588 Ma.
6. South Deep Block
The South Deep block is bounded by the west-dipping WRF (Figs. 2, 3a). The South Deep Block has a consistent geometry; the dip of 5°–10° south is generally constant for all imaged stratigraphic boundaries from base of the Transvaal Basin down through to the West Rand Group. De- tailed seismic interpretations indicated that a fault-parallel anticline- syncline pair (termed the Panvlakte anticline–syncline pair or PAS) sub- tends the WRF in the footwall. The wavelength and amplitude of the PAS is 1.6 km and 200 m, respectively. The PAS anticline is locally known as the Panvlakte Anticline (McCarthy, 2006).
The folds are open and symmetrical in form and periclinal, plunging shallowly north–northeast and south–southwest. The hinge plane of the folds lies parallel to the plane of the WRF (dipping at approximately 40°–50° W). The PAS coalesces and terminates against second-order faults near Kloof KEA Shaft in the southwest of the study area, and near Kloof Shaft 2 in the northeast of the study area. The PAS is interpreted to have formed prior to normal faulting on the WRF because the WRF crosscuts and breaches the western limb of the Panvlakte Anticline.
Furthermore, the PAS is crosscut by a series of steeply east-dipping second-order normal faults that postdate fold formation. A series of horst and grabens are resolved including the Panvlakte Horst de- scribed by McCarthy (2006) (Fig. 3a).
The PAS is also overprinted by a series of steeply-dipping northeast, north–south and east–west trending normal faults that are variously

intruded by dykes of the Klipriviersberg Group. Normal fault throw is meters to tens of meters. The faults are interpreted to have formed dur- ing instability created in the footwall block during normal displacement on the WRF and postdate formation of the PAS.
Additionally, although the Panvlakte Anticline has been interpreted as a drag or rollover fold by Mashabella (2011) and McCarthy (2006) showed that it formed by flexural-slip folding on bedding planes prior to dissection by the WRF, which means it formed during compression and not extension. It subsequently collapsed during normal displacement
on the WRF and synchronous to extrusion of lavas of the Ventersdorp Supergroup.
Summarily, the gross geometry of the footwall to the WRF is that of an open anticline–syncline fold pair (PAS) that failed during extensional tectonics to form a macroscopic collapse breccia with blocks 100s of meters in size. Blocks are bounded by second- and third-order scale normal faults that resolved a horst and graben topography (including the Panvlakte Horst), while some blocks are wholly bounded by dykes of the Klipriviersberg Group. This suggests that these faults may have
M.S.D. Manzi et al. / Tectonophysics 590 (2013) 94–105 99
 Fig. 3. (a) Seismic section (line BB′ in Fig. 1) across the listric West Rand Fault, showing the steeply dipping hanging wall (Kloof block), Tandeka Thrust and PAS-pair in the footwall block (South Deeps). (b) Displacement (throw) measured in seismic sections perpendicular to the West Rand Fault strike at 250 m interval. FW: Footwall; HW: Hanging wall; VCR: Ventersdorp Contact Reef; WRG: West Rand Group; CRG: Central Rand Group; PAS: Panvlakte Anticline Syncline.

100 M.S.D. Manzi et al. / Tectonophysics 590 (2013) 94–105
been active syn-emplacement of the (comagmatic) Klipriviersberg lavas, but offset on some Klipriviersberg dykes may indicate that the faults were active post-emplacement as well. The age of normal faulting is thereby constrained to post-2714 Ma, which is the maximum age for the Klipriviersberg Group.
7. Kloof Block (KDC East)
The Kloof Block is situated between the WRF and the BFZ and hosts the Jabulani Thrust Complex (Figs. 2, 3a). The block hosts the northerly-trending first-order scale Libanon Anticline, the crest of
which is partially decapitated by the north–northeast trending BFZ (Fig. 5). The wavelength of the anticline is greater than 8 km and the amplitude is 2 km. The eastern limb of the Libanon Anticline is dissected by a series of west-dipping reverse faults of the Jabulani Thrust. The general dip of strata in the Kloof Block is approximately 30°E for a northerly strike, but steepens to 55° E near the hinge of the Libanon Anticline, i.e., above 6.0 km depth. Below 6.0 km depth, the Libanon Anticline forms an open, symmetric, and upright fold form. The Libanon Anticline is thus disharmonic; it is likely to host bedding parallel flexural-slip faults that facilitated fold formation, but these are difficult to see in the seismic data.
 Fig. 4. (a) Seismic section (line CC′ in Fig. 1) across the listric Bank Fault, showing the hanging wall (Driefontein/WUDLs) and shallow dipping Jabulani Thrust in the footwall block (Kloof). (b) Displacement (throw) measured in seismic sections perpendicular to the Bank Fault strike at 250 m interval. FW: Footwall; HW: Hanging wall; VCR: Ventersdorp Contact Reef; WRG: West Rand Group; CRG: Central Rand Group.

M.S.D. Manzi et al. / Tectonophysics 590 (2013) 94–105 101
 Fig. 5. Seismic section (line DD′ in Fig. 1) showing the geometry of the Libanon Anticline at the merge boundary between the footwall (Kloof) and hanging wall (Driefontein/ WUDLs) blocks. The Jabulani Thrust and its subordinate faults in the footwall of the Bank Fault crosscut the Libanon Anticline. The hanging wall block hosts minor rollover anticline and a subordinate fault. FW: Footwall; HW: Hanging wall; VCR: Ventersdorp Contact Reef; WRG: West Rand Group; CRG: Central Rand Group; BLR: Black Reef Formation.
The Kloof Block is dissected by several steeply dipping conjugate normal faults (70°–80°W dip) that trend northwest and northeast. Horst and graben architectures are thereby created.
8. The Driefontein-WUDLs Block (KDC West)
The hanging wall (Driefontein-WUDLs block) to the BFZ covers a large portion of the seismic volume (a 35 km long×10 km wide block) and hosts some parts of the deepest gold mines in the world, namely Mponeng, Tau Tona, Savuka and Driefontein gold mines. The Driefontein-WUDLs block is defined by the western limb of the Libanon Anticline (Figs. 2, 5).
In the seismic sections across the Driefontein-WUDLs block it is clear that the Booysens Shale and Turffontein Subgroup are truncated by the VCR creating a gently east-dipping angular unconformity (5°E dip in west–east seismic sections). The Turffontein Subgroup and Booysens Shale were thereby deformed and tilted prior to erosion and subsequent deposition of the VCR, i.e., at or before 2729 ± 19 Ma which is the maxi- mum age established for the VCR (Kositcin et al., 2003).
Above the top of the West Rand Group through to the end of the Central Rand Group, the stratigraphic succession thickens to the west. Above the VCR, the Ventersdorp Supergroup forms a wedge- shaped package that thickens towards the Bank Fault. However, indi- vidual units in the Ventersdorp Supergroup do not wedge against the BF but remain relatively constant in thickness. Furthermore, the Ventersdorp Supergroup is truncated by the BLF creating an angular unconformity that dips gently west (5°–15° W dip in west–east seis- mic sections).
These relationships clearly indicate that the Central Rand Group was macroscopically folded and tilted (probably during formation of the Libanon Anticline), then eroded to form the VCR angular unconformity, which was then overlain by the Ventersdorp Supergroup. During or after deposition of the Ventersdorp Supergroup at ca. 2714 Ma, the Driefontein-WUDLs block was rotated clockwise (on west east-seismic sections) during normal faulting (domino block faulting) on the BF and a rollover anticline was formed McCarthy (2006). The rotated block was subsequently eroded and peneplanated before deposition of the Trans- vaal Supergroup at approximately 2588 Ma. The Driefontein-WUDLs block is crosscut by steeply southwest-dipping normal faults that form synthetic faults to the BF. A horst and graben architecture is thereby created.
9. Discussion
High-resolution merged 3D seismic reflection data that covers a unique 40×30×11 km seismic volume in the West Wits Line and West Rand goldfields has been used to study the strato-structural setting. Focus was given to (1) fault geometry, fault form, and fault-throw anal- ysis, and (2) the relative chronology of tectonic events. These events were correlated with absolute geochronological data of Armstrong et al. (1991), Crow and Condie (1988), Kositcin and Krapež (2004) and Krapež (1985). The results were integrated with borehole data and un- derground maps to validate the seismic interpretations.
The merged data made clear the gross strato-structural architecture of the goldfields; a macroscopic fold-thrust system is crosscut by a mac- roscopic extensional fault array (in an interpreted rift-like system of faults). These are dissected, eroded and overlain by the Transvaal Super- group above an angular unconformity.
The west–east seismic sections across the West Wits Line and West Rand goldfields confirm that the dominantly shale–arenite units of the West Rand Group (ca. 2985–2902 Ma, Kositcin and Krapež, 2004; U– Pb detrital zircon SHRIMP) are unconformably overlain by the Central Rand Group (ca. 2902–2849 Ma) above an angular unconformity, as proposed by Frimmel et al. (2005), Robb and Robb (1998) and SACS (1980). The unconformity juxtaposed units of the West Rand Group (which had been tilted prior to juxtaposition) against the base of the Central Rand Group. Tilting of the West Rand Group must have taken place syn- to post-erosion at ca. 2.9 Ga. The cause of tilting of the West Rand Group is not known, but it is clear that tectonic activity ex- posed the clastic and largely marine sediments of the West Rand Group to erosion as early as 2.9 Ga. The event is hereafter termed the Asazi Event (Asazi meaning unknown in the IsiZulu language).
The seismic sections also resolve an unconformable relationship be- tween the Central Rand Group and the auriferous Ventersdorp Contact Reef (VCR), which are dated at 2942 ± 6 and 2729 ± 19 Ma (discordant U–Pb SHRIMP ages), respectively, from igneous-detrital xenotime/ zircon aggregates (Kositcin et al., 2003). The VCR is interpreted as the erosional product of the Central Rand Group, as suggested by McCarthy (2006), Robb et al. (1991), Spencer (1992), Winter (1994) and others.
We interpreted the northerly-trending, upright, tight to open Libanon Anticline from the merged West Rand and 1995 historical WUDLs datasets. Parasitic folds, such as the Panvlakte anticline– syncline pair (PAS) on the eastern limb of the Libanon Anticline, and re- verse faults, such as the west-dipping Tandeka and Jabulani thrusts, were

102 M.S.D. Manzi et al. / Tectonophysics 590 (2013) 94–105
also resolved. They are interpreted as second-order structures to the Libanon Anticline, which has a wavelength of 8 km and amplitude of 2 km. The Libanon Anticline is a first-order crustal-scale fold that proba- bly formed prior to progressive fold-thrust development, as suggested by Jolley et al. (2007).
The Libanon Anticline and parasitic folds formed syn- to post- deposition of the West Rand and Central Rand groups because they are folded about the hinges of the folds; the Tandeka and Jabulani thrusts displace the West Rand Group and thus also formed after that group. The age of fold-fault formation is best estimated from the youn- gest U–Pb geochronological age for the VCR at 2.7 Ga. It corresponds with (1) compressive deformation as described by Barnicoat et al. (1997), McCarthy et al. (1982) and Roering et al. (1991), (2) block faulting, folding and thrusting along the northern margin of the Witwa- tersrand Basin (c.f. De Wit and Tinker, 2004; Frimmel, 2005; Schmitz et al., 2004; Stanistreet et al., 1986 and others), and thrust-fold formation as detailed by Beach and Smith (2007). It also corresponds with the Umzawami Event of Dankert and Hein (2010).
We have interpreted the WRF and BF from the dataset. The WRF and BF are north–northeast trending and approximately 11 km and 20 km long, respectively. They are steeply dipping (65°–70° to the west) listric faults, flattening at the décollement horizon into the dominantly shale units of the West Rand Group.
This work confirms previous studies of Dankert and Hein (2010), Gibson et al. (2000), Gibson (2004) and Mambane et al. (2011) that these structures crosscut and offset the West Rand Group, Central Rand Group and Ventersdorp Supergroup, but do not penetrate the base of the Transvaal Basin, therefore restricting the tectonic evolution of the faults to pre-2.58 Ga. In contrast, this work contradicts studies by Coward et al. (1995) and Vermaakt and Chunnet (1994) who interpreted that the BF propagated through the BLF and displaced it by at least 200 m. A significant number of faults, identified through at- tribute analysis by Manzi et al. (2012a), are associated with syn- to post-Transvaal Basin development and not formation of the WRF and BF; the seismic data shows that displacement on these late faults is in the order of meters to tens of meters only.
Based on the seismic sections, and with a view to Jolley et al. (2004, 2007) and Roering et al. (1991), we propose that at the end of deposition of the West Rand Group, a tectonic event witnessed; (1) tilting and expo- sure of the West Rand Group at approximately 2.90 Ga by landscape up- lift and marine regression during the Asazi Event (Fig. 6a); (2) landscape evolution accompanied deposition of the sandstone, conglomerate and shale units of the Central Rand Group (ca. 2902–2849 Ma) in a subaerial braided deltaic system (Fig. 6b); (3) formation of a fold-thrust belt dur- ing the Umzawami Event of Dankert and Hein (2010) at ca. 2.73 Ga, in which folding of the landscape was synchronous with the formation of thrusts, reverse and flexural-slip faults (Fig. 6c). The Libanon Anticline and its parasite folds (the PAS) are the dramatic expression of this event and are similar to macroscopic folds imaged by Beach and Smith (2007), and Frimmel and Minter (2002) in their studies for the Welkom and Klerksdorp goldfields. We confirm their findings that fold-thrust for- mation was progressive and directed from the west.
Furthermore, the high-resolution 3-D seismic reflection data, inte- grated with borehole and mapping data, has allowed us to propose a new model for the goldfields that accords with conclusions of Beach and Smith (2007) and Jolley et al. (2004, 2007) in which thrust-fold for- mation syn- to post-deposition of the Central Rand Group was followed by extensional collapse, initially during deposition of the Ventersdorp Supergroup (Fig. 6d,e). The extensional event is hereafter referred to as the Hlukana-Platberg Event (Hlukana meaning tear apart in the IsiZulu language).
The data makes clear that the WRF and BF developed as tear or scissor faults (hinged in the south–southeast) after deposition of the Klipriviersberg lavas and likely during emplacement of the Platberg Group (ca. 2.70–2.64 Ga) when a mantle plume may have heated the lithospheric mantle (Clendenin et al., 1988; Crow and Condie,
1988; Eriksson et al., 2001, 2009) causing regional crustal anatexis (Taylor et al., 2010). The formation of the WRF and BF at that time probably coincided with graben formation across the Kaapvaal craton (c.f., De Kock et al., 2012; Stanistreet et al., 1986), and perhaps with progressive pseudotachylite formation in the West Rand goldfields and elsewhere, as described by Killick and Roering (1995, 1998) and Mambane et al. (2011), as the crust and lithosphere were influenced by regional-scale extensional tectonics.
Importantly, the seismic sections do not support wedging of the Klipriviersberg lavas against the WRF or BF because individual units continue unthickened across both sides of the faults, i.e., the idea that the faults formed as growth faults (sensu stricto) during deposition of the lavas, as suggested by McCarthy (2006), is not supported. In fact, the Klipriviersberg packet thickens from east to west in restored sec- tions (c.f., Frimmel and Minter, 2002; Tinker et al., 2002), and although they were probably emplaced in an extensional tectonic setting (Van der Westhuizen et al., 1991 and references therein), it is not likely that the WRF and BF (sensu stricto) formed at that time. Instead, we in- terpret that the Klipriviersberg volcanic rocks were listric-faulted dur- ing the Hlukana-Platberg Event (concomitant to graben formation) and eroded leaving a thin eroded package to the east of the WRF and a protected thick package to the west. The fold-thrust belt and exten- sional fault array does not penetrate the base of the Transvaal Basin (Fig. 6f).
